README.md, before:

# Handheld Multi-Frame Super-Resolution

[[Paper]](https://www.ipol.im/pub/pre/460) [[Demo]](https://ipolcore.ipol.im/demo/clientApp/demo.html?id=460)

**Update 02/23/23: We have now made the demo on the IPOL plateform publicly available. You can use it with you own raw images.**

This repository contains a non-official implementation of the “Handheld Multi-Frame Super-Resolution algorithm” paper by Wronski et al. (used in the Google Pixel 3 camera), which performs simultaneously multi-image super-resolution demosaicking and denoising from a burst of raw photgraphs. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first publicly available comprehensive implementation of this well-acclaimed paper, for which no official code has been released so far.
 
The original paper can be found [here](https://sites.google.com/view/handheld-super-res/), whereas our publication detailing the implementation is available on [IPOL](https://www.ipol.im/pub/pre/460). In this companion publication, we fill the implementation blanks of the original SIGGRAPH paper, and disclose many details to actually implement the method.
Note that our Numba-based implementation is not as fast as that of Google. It is mainly for scientific and educational purpose, with a special care given to make the code as readable and understandable as possible, and was not optimized to minimize the execution time or the memory usage as in an industrial context. Yet, on high-end consumer grade GPUs (NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU), a 12MP burst of 20 images is expected to generate a 48MP image within less than 4 seconds (without counting Numba's just-in-time compilation), which is enough for running comparisons, or being the base of a faster implementation. 

We hope this code and the details in the IPOL publication will help the image processing and computational photography communities, and foster new top-of-the-line super-resolution approaches. Please find below two examples of demosaicking and super-resolution from a real raw burst from [this repository](https://github.com/goutamgmb/deep-rep). 

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/46826148/212689891-603e0502-c817-4623-9134-3e7522c72680.png)
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/46826148/212690127-eb18b00b-5457-44b6-9e27-7f9f88159f4a.png)


#### Post-processing

In the examples above and in our IPOL paper, we used the post-processing approach of this [repo](https://github.com/teboli/fast_two_stage_psf_correction) to remove the remaining optical aberrations on the following examples. 
Check also our publicly available implementation of **Polyblur** in this [repo](https://github.com/teboli/polyblur) to sharpen the result you get with this super-resolution code.

## Get started
We provide a conda environment containing appropriate pytorch, cuda and numba version:
```bash
conda env create -f environment.yaml
conda activate handheld
```

(OPTIONAL) We have provided in `./data` the noise curve for the correction of the robustness ratio for the Google Pixel 4a camera by taking the affine noise coefficients from the EXIF tags, and subsequently run
```bash
python monte_carlo_simulation.py
```
Please replace `alpha` and `beta` with the coefficients of your camera, and run the MC simulator to generate the correction curves at several ISO levels tailored for you specific device. Our curves may work for you camera but it might be sub-optimal as the noise models of the Google Pixel 4a camera and yours may diverge.

Place your .dng image burst in the `./test_burst/` folder. You can download some dng bursts [here](https://github.com/goutamgmb/deep-rep), or download the latest release of the code already containing test bursts. Now, simply run the code for x2 super-resolution with:
```
python run_handheld.py --impath test_burst --outpath output.png
```

You can also use the following canvas in your own scripts:
```python
from handeld_super_resolution import process

# Set the verbose level.
options = {'verbose': 1}

# Specify the scale (1 is demosaicking), the merging kernel, and if you want to postprocess the final image.
params = {
  "scale": 2,  # choose between 1 and 2 in practice.
  "merging": {"kernel": "handheld"},  # keep unchanged.
  "post processing": {"on": True}  # set it to False if you want to use your own ISP.
  }

# Run the algorithm.
burst_path = 'path/to/folder/containing/raw/files'
output_img = process(burst_path, options, params)
```

The core of the algorithm is in `handheld_super_resolution.process(burst_path, options, params)` where :
<ul>
  <li><code>burst_path</code> is a string containing the file containing .dng files.</li>
  <li><code>options</code> is an optionnal dictionnary containing the verbose option, where higher number means more details during the execution <code>{'verbose' : 1}</code> for example.</li>
  <li><code>params</code> is an optional dictionanry containing all the parameters of the pipleine (such as the upscaling factor). The pipeline is designed to automatically pick some of the parameters based on an estimation of the image SNR and the rest are set to default values, but they can be overwritten by simply assignin a value in <code>params</code>.</li>
</ul>

To obtain the bursts used in the publication, please download the latest release of the repo. It contains the code and two raw bursts of respectively 13 images from [[Bhat et al., ICCV21]](https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.08286) and 20 images from [[Lecouat et al., SIGGRAPH22]](https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.14671). Otherwise specify the path to any burst of raw images, e.g., `*.dng`, `*.ARW` or `*.CR2` for instance. The result is found in the `./results/` folder. Remember that if you have activated the post-processing flag, the predicted image will be further tone-mapped and sharpened. Deactivate it if you want to plug in your own ISP.

## Generating DNG

Saving images as DNG requires extra-dependencies and steps:
1. Install imageio using pip:

    ```bash
    pip install imageio
    ```

2. Install exiftool. You can download the appropriate version for your operating system from the [exiftool website](https://exiftool.org/).

3. Download the DNG SDK from the [Adobe website](https://helpx.adobe.com/camera-raw/digital-negative.html#dng_sdk_download).

4. Follow the instructions in the `DNG_ReadMe.txt` file included in the downloaded DNG SDK to complete the installation.

5. Set the paths to the exiftool and DNG validate executables in the `utils_dng.py` script. Open the `utils_dng.py` file located in the project directory, and modify the values of the `EXIFTOOL_PATH` and `DNG_VALIDATE_PATH` variables to match the paths to the exiftool and DNG validate executables on your system.

    ```python
    # utils_dng.py

    # Set the path to the exiftool executable
    EXIFTOOL_PATH = "/path/to/exiftool"

    # Set the path to the DNG validate executable
    DNG_VALIDATE_PATH = "/path/to/dng_validate"
    ```

    Note that you may need to adjust the paths based on the location where you installed exiftool and DNG validate on your system.

That's it! Once you've completed these steps you should be able to save the output as DNG, for example by running:
```
python run_handheld.py --impath test_burst --outpath output.dng
```
## About the noise profile
The method requires the noise profile of the camera, which consists of $\alpha$ and $\beta$, two parameters that depends on the camera and its settings. In a nutshell, they describe how the variance of the noise $\sigma_n^2$ evolves with the brightness $I$ : $\sigma_n^2 = \alpha\times I + \beta$. They are necessary to compute the noise curves in `monte_carlo_simulation.py` or `fast_monte_carlo.py`, and to perform the generalised Anscombe transform (GAT) in `utils_image.py`.

By default, the program reads the `noise profile` tag of the dng stack to determine $\alpha$ and $\beta$. If these values are unavailable or wrong, you can provide your own values of $\alpha$ and $\beta$. If the stack was captured using a smartphone, the noise profile of the Pixel 4 can give good results : 
```python
    alpha = 1.80710882e-4 * ISO / 100
    beta = 3.1937599182128e-6 * (ISO / 100)**2
```

For better results, determining the accurate noise profile of your device can be done using tools [such as this demo](https://www.ipol.im/pub/art/2013/45/)

## Citation
If this code or the implementation details of the companion IPOL publication are of any help, please cite our work:
```BibTex
@article{lafenetre23handheld,
  title={Implementing Handheld Burst Super-Resolution},
  author={Lafenetre, Jamy and Facciolo, Gabriele and Eboli, Thomas},
  journal={Image Processing On Line},
  year={2023},
}
```

## Troubleshooting
If you encounter any bug, please open an issue and/or sent an email at jamy.lafenetre@ens-paris-saclay.fr and thomas.eboli@ens-paris-saclay.fr.

## Parameters
The list of all the parameters, their default values and their relation to the SNR can be found in `params.py`. Here are a few of them, grouped by category :

### General parameters
|Parameter|usage|
|--|--|
|scale|The upscaling factor, can be floating but should remain bewteen 1 and 3.|
|Ts|Tile size for the ICA algorithm, and the block matching. Is fixed by the SNR.|
|mode|bayer or grey ; the pipeline can processe grey or color image.|
|debug|If turned on, other debug informations can be returned|

### Block matching
|Parameter|usage|
|--|--|
|factors|list of the downsampling factor to generate the Guassian pyramid|
|tileSize|list of the tileSizes during local search. The last stage should always be Ts !|
|searchRadia|The search radius for each stage|
|distances|L1 or L2; the norm to minimize at each stage|

### ICA
|Parameter|usage|
|--|--|
|kanadeIter|Number of iterations of the ICA algorithm|
|sigma blur|Std of the Gausian filter applied to the grey image before computing gradient. If 0, no filter is applied|

### Robustness
|Parameter|usage|
|--|--|
|on|Whether the robustness is activated or not|
|t||
|s1||
|s2||
|Mt||

### Merging
|Parameter|usage|
|--|--|
|kernel|handheld or iso; whether to use the steerable kernels or the isotropic constant ones (Experiment 3.5in the IPOL article)|
|k_detail||
|k_denoise||
|D_tr||
|D_th||
|k_shrink||
|k_stretch||

### Others
The default floating number representation and the default threads per block number can be modified in <code>utils.py</code>.

### Accumulated robustness denoiser
3 options are available : Gaussian filter during post-processing, median filter during post-processing or filtering during the merge of the reference image (See section 23 of the IPOL article). All of them can be turned on or off and parametrized freely, although the last one gave the best results.

### Known Issues
- The threshold functions and all the hyper-parameters mentionned in the IPOL article have only been partially tweaked : better results are expected with an in depth optimization.
- For images whose estimated SNR is under 14, the tile size should be 64 but the block matching module cannot handle that.

Commit message:

Update README with Windows installation instructions
Advise Windows users to use WSL to avoid numba issues #48

README.md, after:

# Handheld Multi-Frame Super-Resolution

[[Paper]](https://www.ipol.im/pub/pre/460) [[Demo]](https://ipolcore.ipol.im/demo/clientApp/demo.html?id=460)

**Update 02/23/23: We have now made the demo on the IPOL plateform publicly available. You can use it with you own raw images.**

This repository contains a non-official implementation of the “Handheld Multi-Frame Super-Resolution algorithm” paper by Wronski et al. (used in the Google Pixel 3 camera), which performs simultaneously multi-image super-resolution demosaicking and denoising from a burst of raw photgraphs. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first publicly available comprehensive implementation of this well-acclaimed paper, for which no official code has been released so far.
 
The original paper can be found [here](https://sites.google.com/view/handheld-super-res/), whereas our publication detailing the implementation is available on [IPOL](https://www.ipol.im/pub/pre/460). In this companion publication, we fill the implementation blanks of the original SIGGRAPH paper, and disclose many details to actually implement the method.
Note that our Numba-based implementation is not as fast as that of Google. It is mainly for scientific and educational purpose, with a special care given to make the code as readable and understandable as possible, and was not optimized to minimize the execution time or the memory usage as in an industrial context. Yet, on high-end consumer grade GPUs (NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU), a 12MP burst of 20 images is expected to generate a 48MP image within less than 4 seconds (without counting Numba's just-in-time compilation), which is enough for running comparisons, or being the base of a faster implementation. 

We hope this code and the details in the IPOL publication will help the image processing and computational photography communities, and foster new top-of-the-line super-resolution approaches. Please find below two examples of demosaicking and super-resolution from a real raw burst from [this repository](https://github.com/goutamgmb/deep-rep). 

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/46826148/212689891-603e0502-c817-4623-9134-3e7522c72680.png)
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/46826148/212690127-eb18b00b-5457-44b6-9e27-7f9f88159f4a.png)


#### Post-processing

In the examples above and in our IPOL paper, we used the post-processing approach of this [repo](https://github.com/teboli/fast_two_stage_psf_correction) to remove the remaining optical aberrations on the following examples. 
Check also our publicly available implementation of **Polyblur** in this [repo](https://github.com/teboli/polyblur) to sharpen the result you get with this super-resolution code.

## Get started
>⚠️ For windows users, we recommend to perform the install using WSL to avoid potential issues that can be encountered with numba (see issue [#48](https://github.com/Jamy-L/Handheld-Multi-Frame-Super-Resolution/issues/48)).

We provide a conda environment containing appropriate pytorch, cuda and numba version:
```bash
conda env create -f environment.yaml
conda activate handheld
```

(OPTIONAL) We have provided in `./data` the noise curve for the correction of the robustness ratio for the Google Pixel 4a camera by taking the affine noise coefficients from the EXIF tags, and subsequently run
```bash
python monte_carlo_simulation.py
```
Please replace `alpha` and `beta` with the coefficients of your camera, and run the MC simulator to generate the correction curves at several ISO levels tailored for you specific device. Our curves may work for you camera but it might be sub-optimal as the noise models of the Google Pixel 4a camera and yours may diverge.

Place your .dng image burst in the `./test_burst/` folder. You can download some dng bursts [here](https://github.com/goutamgmb/deep-rep), or download the latest release of the code already containing test bursts. Now, simply run the code for x2 super-resolution with:
```
python run_handheld.py --impath test_burst --outpath output.png
```

You can also use the following canvas in your own scripts:
```python
from handeld_super_resolution import process

# Set the verbose level.
options = {'verbose': 1}

# Specify the scale (1 is demosaicking), the merging kernel, and if you want to postprocess the final image.
params = {
  "scale": 2,  # choose between 1 and 2 in practice.
  "merging": {"kernel": "handheld"},  # keep unchanged.
  "post processing": {"on": True}  # set it to False if you want to use your own ISP.
  }

# Run the algorithm.
burst_path = 'path/to/folder/containing/raw/files'
output_img = process(burst_path, options, params)
```

The core of the algorithm is in `handheld_super_resolution.process(burst_path, options, params)` where :
<ul>
  <li><code>burst_path</code> is a string containing the file containing .dng files.</li>
  <li><code>options</code> is an optionnal dictionnary containing the verbose option, where higher number means more details during the execution <code>{'verbose' : 1}</code> for example.</li>
  <li><code>params</code> is an optional dictionanry containing all the parameters of the pipleine (such as the upscaling factor). The pipeline is designed to automatically pick some of the parameters based on an estimation of the image SNR and the rest are set to default values, but they can be overwritten by simply assignin a value in <code>params</code>.</li>
</ul>

To obtain the bursts used in the publication, please download the latest release of the repo. It contains the code and two raw bursts of respectively 13 images from [[Bhat et al., ICCV21]](https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.08286) and 20 images from [[Lecouat et al., SIGGRAPH22]](https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.14671). Otherwise specify the path to any burst of raw images, e.g., `*.dng`, `*.ARW` or `*.CR2` for instance. The result is found in the `./results/` folder. Remember that if you have activated the post-processing flag, the predicted image will be further tone-mapped and sharpened. Deactivate it if you want to plug in your own ISP.

## Generating DNG

Saving images as DNG requires extra-dependencies and steps:
1. Install imageio using pip:

    ```bash
    pip install imageio
    ```

2. Install exiftool. You can download the appropriate version for your operating system from the [exiftool website](https://exiftool.org/).

3. Download the DNG SDK from the [Adobe website](https://helpx.adobe.com/camera-raw/digital-negative.html#dng_sdk_download).

4. Follow the instructions in the `DNG_ReadMe.txt` file included in the downloaded DNG SDK to complete the installation.

5. Set the paths to the exiftool and DNG validate executables in the `utils_dng.py` script. Open the `utils_dng.py` file located in the project directory, and modify the values of the `EXIFTOOL_PATH` and `DNG_VALIDATE_PATH` variables to match the paths to the exiftool and DNG validate executables on your system.

    ```python
    # utils_dng.py

    # Set the path to the exiftool executable
    EXIFTOOL_PATH = "/path/to/exiftool"

    # Set the path to the DNG validate executable
    DNG_VALIDATE_PATH = "/path/to/dng_validate"
    ```

    Note that you may need to adjust the paths based on the location where you installed exiftool and DNG validate on your system.

That's it! Once you've completed these steps you should be able to save the output as DNG, for example by running:
```
python run_handheld.py --impath test_burst --outpath output.dng
```
## About the noise profile
The method requires the noise profile of the camera, which consists of $\alpha$ and $\beta$, two parameters that depends on the camera and its settings. In a nutshell, they describe how the variance of the noise $\sigma_n^2$ evolves with the brightness $I$ : $\sigma_n^2 = \alpha\times I + \beta$. They are necessary to compute the noise curves in `monte_carlo_simulation.py` or `fast_monte_carlo.py`, and to perform the generalised Anscombe transform (GAT) in `utils_image.py`.

By default, the program reads the `noise profile` tag of the dng stack to determine $\alpha$ and $\beta$. If these values are unavailable or wrong, you can provide your own values of $\alpha$ and $\beta$. If the stack was captured using a smartphone, the noise profile of the Pixel 4 can give good results : 
```python
    alpha = 1.80710882e-4 * ISO / 100
    beta = 3.1937599182128e-6 * (ISO / 100)**2
```

For better results, determining the accurate noise profile of your device can be done using tools [such as this demo](https://www.ipol.im/pub/art/2013/45/)

## Citation
If this code or the implementation details of the companion IPOL publication are of any help, please cite our work:
```BibTex
@article{lafenetre23handheld,
  title={Implementing Handheld Burst Super-Resolution},
  author={Lafenetre, Jamy and Facciolo, Gabriele and Eboli, Thomas},
  journal={Image Processing On Line},
  year={2023},
}
```

## Troubleshooting
If you encounter any bug, please open an issue and/or sent an email at jamy.lafenetre@ens-paris-saclay.fr and thomas.eboli@ens-paris-saclay.fr.

## Parameters
The list of all the parameters, their default values and their relation to the SNR can be found in `params.py`. Here are a few of them, grouped by category :

### General parameters
|Parameter|usage|
|--|--|
|scale|The upscaling factor, can be floating but should remain bewteen 1 and 3.|
|Ts|Tile size for the ICA algorithm, and the block matching. Is fixed by the SNR.|
|mode|bayer or grey ; the pipeline can processe grey or color image.|
|debug|If turned on, other debug informations can be returned|

### Block matching
|Parameter|usage|
|--|--|
|factors|list of the downsampling factor to generate the Guassian pyramid|
|tileSize|list of the tileSizes during local search. The last stage should always be Ts !|
|searchRadia|The search radius for each stage|
|distances|L1 or L2; the norm to minimize at each stage|

### ICA
|Parameter|usage|
|--|--|
|kanadeIter|Number of iterations of the ICA algorithm|
|sigma blur|Std of the Gausian filter applied to the grey image before computing gradient. If 0, no filter is applied|

### Robustness
|Parameter|usage|
|--|--|
|on|Whether the robustness is activated or not|
|t||
|s1||
|s2||
|Mt||

### Merging
|Parameter|usage|
|--|--|
|kernel|handheld or iso; whether to use the steerable kernels or the isotropic constant ones (Experiment 3.5in the IPOL article)|
|k_detail||
|k_denoise||
|D_tr||
|D_th||
|k_shrink||
|k_stretch||

### Others
The default floating number representation and the default threads per block number can be modified in <code>utils.py</code>.

### Accumulated robustness denoiser
3 options are available : Gaussian filter during post-processing, median filter during post-processing or filtering during the merge of the reference image (See section 23 of the IPOL article). All of them can be turned on or off and parametrized freely, although the last one gave the best results.

### Known Issues
- The threshold functions and all the hyper-parameters mentionned in the IPOL article have only been partially tweaked : better results are expected with an in depth optimization.
- For images whose estimated SNR is under 14, the tile size should be 64 but the block matching module cannot handle that.
